I basically did not trust them. I mean, I was really
early on was convinced we were in a guerrilla
conflict. From January to, I want to say, April, I
was breaking in at the Third Surge in Bien Hoa. And
then they decided that they would really make it
mobile. And there was going to be a big operation in
the highlands up near Pleiku. And they were going
to take the hospital on the road. And some
brilliant person decided that they could not take
the fragile women along. So they played fruit
basket turnover with every nurse corps officer in
the entire command in MACV. And they brought all
the men nurses in to the third search, and they
shipped all of us women out to replace them. And I
got sent down to the third field in Saigon, which
might have well have been Walter Reed. It was the
same problem again. And when I reported in, in my
fatigues, who was the brand new chief nurse
sitting at the desk but brand new Lieutenant
Colonel Kitty Betts. And her first words to me
were, well, Lieutenant Hart, you didn't last out
in the field very long, did you? And I said, no,
ma'am. But I won't be here long either, ma'am. And
she said, you know, you can't wear that outfit
here. This is a station hospital. You've got to
have duty whites. I said, man, my orders do not
stipulate duty whites, and I don't have them with
me. I'll have to wear my fatigues. She said, no, you
won't. You can wear your class B greens. So you know
that little whack outfit, that little green and
white polyester thing with the short sleeves and
the black shoes? That's what I wore in Saigon on the
wards on duty. and I arrived my first that night for
night shift I mean so much for orientation now they
yak on and on about how we have to take these little
children under our wings and teach them
everything we know about our environment for six
weeks before we make them responsible for
anything and those days we just walked in and said
hi I'm the new nurse where's the where do you keep
the you know And I arrived, and there were two
medics there, kind of wondering if a nurse was
going to show up. What it was is the third field had
been the American school in Saigon before the
balloon went up and the war got big, and they moved
all the embassy dependents out. And it was built
like a school, and this was a four-classroom,
single-story wing, a little lanai sort of affair,
with a covered porch out in front of it. And those
four classrooms were my four wards, and they each
had about ten beds in them. Again, three of them
were surgical wards, and the fourth one in the back
was the clap ward. And all the guys with
epididymitis and swollen scrotums and stuff like
that would go in and lob the ice bags under the
sheet. Chunk, you know, chunk. You don't look. You
just throw. You can arrange it yourself. but give
out lots and lots of penicillin, streptomycin,
chloramycin. Antibiotic rounds were a biggie. I
was just counting my blessings I didn't get sent
over to the gymnasium where they had the malaria
patients in triple bunks. There were like 80, 120
of them at a time in the gymnasium in these bunks. My
roommate was a medical nurse and worked in the
gymnasium. Ugh, bad. And I wasn't in the neuro
floor either, where all the guys with the gunshot
wounds to the head were busy expiring. I was no fun.
Interestingly enough, I met a nurse there who was a
full-blooded Navajo Indian. Now, A, you don't see
very many women Navajos off the reservation in the
first place. B, very doggone few of them end up as
college graduates with a profession. And C, they
don't leave New Mexico and Arizona, even when they
have. And Annie Yazzie, for some reason, ended up
in the Army Nurse Corps and assigned to Vietnam.
She had a All her black hair pulled into a single
braid that she could sit on, and she coiled it up,
smacked her nurse corps hat on. You want to talk
about somebody who had culture shock with that,
she would be worth a book all by herself. Real
quiet, and nobody got to know her very well. I don't
think I ever saw her smile. But from what I know
about Navajos, that may not have meant what it
would have meant for me. She worked on the neural
floor. Anyway, so. About two months later, after
they had had to court-martial two of the male
nurses, and they had had terrible disciplinary
problems with the drinking and the gambling and
the carousing that was going on, the third search
just went to sea, bad, with no civilizing
influence. The CO put his foot down and said, I want
my troops back. And they hauled us all back in,
except a couple of gals refused to come back. They
were mad, and they were not submitting to it if they
weren't directly ordered. But most of us went
back, and all those other guys get sent, who we
never saw, so they were just, you know, Figman's
ideas, went back to where they were supposed to be.
And in that two months in Saigon, it was brought
home to me real fast that this was a guerrilla
operation and you couldn't trust anybody. I mean,
it was daily stories of, you know, my own medics on
night shift were out shopping one morning when
they got off duty and somebody threw a grenade in
their little pedicab, and One of them picked it up
and threw it back out, and there were about 15
people killed and hurt just on the street. And he
was doing split-second thinking. He didn't think
about where he threw it. He just thought about
getting it out from under his own feet. And he was
weird for a week after that.
So I never wanted to win the hearts and minds of
people. I didn't really want to get to know them
because I didn't trust them, just from ground
zero. Not that I blamed them for it. I just accepted
it as a fact of life, like a snake handler who
respects their abilities. Or a tiger tamer, you
know. When it came time for you to leave, how did you
feel about it? How did you cope with your feelings?
I was glad to leave. It was a 12-month tour, and I
came in as a replacement mid-tour. One of the gals
who went over with the original batch with the
third search was just diagnosed as being pregnant
and was sent back six months into the tour, and I was
sent to replace her. So I went through three crews
in my 18 months. The people who were there for six
months after I got there then left, and the new crew
came in. I spent most of the year with them, and then
because of the extension, I was working with
virtually strangers when I got ready to leave. So I
didn't have any ties to break with my coworkers
because they had left me. This picture shows it
pretty well because this was when we set up in Dong
Tam. And those of us who had been with the unit in
Bien Hoa were all wearing Third Surge patches. And
when we set up in Dong Tam, there's only two of us
left with that patch on. What happened to the
picture? No, mislighted. Well, anyway, these
were our third surge patches.
Oh, here we go. You see? There's only two of us left
with that patch on. The others, these kids, I don't
even remember their names. I served with them for
about two months. And during that two months, we
packed up and we moved, what, 150 kilometers south
and reset up, and we set up an inflatable hospital.
That's the only picture I've got that shows the
inflatable units. Most of the time, we were in what
were called Southeast Asia Hooches, which were
basically looked like this. At some point in time,
we plasticed over the windows and put in
single-unit
window air conditioners. These were the litter
racks in pre-op. This is when they carried the
litters in off the helicopter, just plopped them
right on that. The metal litter racks just were not
cool, so the sergeants built those. They were
sturdier and stayed put when you were doing things
like CPR. But, I don't know, it had been 18 months. I
was six months a bride and had never really lived
with my husband. He'd been wounded twice. I was
really kind of interested in getting him out of
there, too. My dad had gone on home, and I was ready
to go back and start on the next part of my life. I was
getting out of the Army. In those days, you did. You
know, I was a wife. I was going to have children. I
was going to wear white clothes and go to lunches
and coffees and, you know, do all that good stuff
like my mother had done before me. Little did I know
that social change was swirling around me as I even
spoke. I wasn't even planning to work.
What did you feel like when you returned? I'd never
seen so many things to buy and eat and you know you
didn't have to to worry about you didn't have to
look twice at the cab driver you know that kind of
thing I just remember just being delighted tired
jet lag kind of you came back on a 26-hour flight and
then you changed air airports you know you had to
take the shuttle bus down from Travis to the San
Francisco, whatever that airport is called. And
then we flew to Denver. We got into Denver about 1 in
the morning. His folks were there to pick us up. We
got in the station wagon in the middle of the night
and drove three hours south to his home in Lamar,
Colorado. And about, you know, 4 in the morning, I
climbed into bed. I mean, you don't have a lot of,
let's examine our reactions. You know, you get
real, real... I woke up about noon because I was
convinced that I was being bombed. And I scrambled
up in this strange bedroom, in this strange bed. I
scrambled the headboard of the bed, and there's a
window right over it, and there's this airplane
coming right for me. And I screamed. And it just, I
went, whoo, it was a crop duster. And, of course,
Lee had grown up with that stuff all his life, but
I'd grown up on air bases, and when a plane was
coming right for you, this was problems. I wasn't
used to people flying 20 feet off the deck for no
good reason. But then it was a matter of, I had no
clothes. What I had, I had left with my folks a year
and a half before. And it was half the country away.
I had to go shopping. I had to get a few things. I
didn't really have any big reaction. We left there
and went and visited my folks briefly in
Washington. Then we drove down to Fort Benning and
got our quarters and then we left there and went up
to Jody and Bob's wedding and then we went back to
Fort Benning and of course we were living with
people who had all just well at least the guys had
just all come through the same thing and a lot of
them were people we knew it was Benning was a big
post everybody was there for the advanced course
and most of them were first lieutenants moving
into promotable for captain and so a lot of our same
buddy group was there either at the same time or
came before we left. Did you talk about Vietnam at
all with these people? With them, yes. Do you think
that helped you return the vice those who just got
out and returned back to the Seminole?
It wasn't ever that hard on me. I mean, bad things
happen to people who are in hospitals. That's
never changed. It was true when I was a student
nurse at Maryview. People had cancer. People got
hit by trucks. You know, things happen. We handle
gunshot wounds every day at Scott and White. Well,
not every day, but it's not infrequent. And so the
how they got that way wasn't a big issue. Now, for
the guys who were cannon fodder, I guess it was a big
issue. Why did I get sent out there to get shot at?
But, uh... The thing I absorbed from them over the
next year was a terrible and bitter sense of having
been sent off to do something and then sent back to
be spit at. That brings us to how do you feel about
the protesters? Vicious. I have absolutely no use
for them. As an employer, I will not hire one if I
know that's in their background, and I will find
some other way to justify it, since I know I have an
illegal leg to stand on.
Do you have any other thing you want to add or feel
would be pertinent?
It hasn't ever been the same for me as it has for him.
When we were in Colorado and he was on degree
completion, I was getting a degree too with my GI
Bill. I'm one of the few women veterans you'll ever
meet who used the whole sucker up. I got a
bachelor's and all but one semester of a master's
out of it. I just considered it was something they
owed me. You know, I don't know if I'd have felt that
way if it hadn't been for the fact that it was not a
patriotic, publicly supported war. But I really
felt like then it held me. Not because I felt like
I'd been under great hardships or, you know,
because it hadn't been. I lived good. I ate
A-rations, fresh lettuce, ice cream. I mean, I was
in a hospital for Pete's sake. Now, granted, the
outfits we wore left something to be desired in
terms of fashion, but hey, they were comfy. I had a
Sears and Roebuck charge card and a catalog I was
the shopping center of the entire Third Surge
always had orders coming back and forth the APO
96227 that Sears and Roebuck knew that well we all
dressed out of Sears and it was all on my charge card
but
the few of them that I have met since And the most
recent one is Karen Mundell. This lady now has a
PhD. She also used up all her GI Bill. And she's the
director of the Women's Center at St. Luke's AMI in
Denver, Colorado. And she's a nationally known
speaker at healthcare conferences. And, you
know, we became competent under those
circumstances. We were cut away from absolutely
everything else that we had depended on in the
past, and we did what we did, and we did it well, and
we survived, and we became very cut and dry about
how things are attacked, how things are
approached, how problems are, the
problem-solving process. And I think that's the
invisible link when we recognize each other
because we have this very brusque, attitude that
you don't get in a real structured hospital
environment where there's always bosses bosses
bosses kind of thing we didn't have that you were
the pre-op nurse in the middle of the night you were
it until the others got themselves shagged out of
their bags and you know brushed their teeth and got
there to help you and decisions you made in that 10
minutes were critical
it was it was a real interesting way to spend a
couple years of your youth very few of them stayed
in the MERS corps a number of them rejoined I ran
into a number of them eight years later when I
rejoined and they'd all had breaks in service and
had gone out and found that indeed the civilian
world did have a tendency to be slow and corporate
and all that kind of thing and then we joined the
army and found out that in peacetime it did too We
were used to combat pace of this and these fixed.
Fix it. And, you know, filling out three years in
advance capital budget schedules and that kind of
thing just wasn't our idea of how things were done.
But like I said before, the names change and you
can't keep track of these people. And so, you know,
other than having, I ran into Karen at a conference
just last year. I don't know where any of these
people are.
Thanks for your time. Thanks for that interview.
You're welcome. This has been an interview with
Geraldine Ann Johnson, maiden name Hart. She
served in the Army Nurse Corps and was stationed at
Vietnam from January 1966 to June 1967. She is
married to a retired Army Lieutenant Colonel Lee
Leonard C. Johnson with two children. She is
presently the head nurse at Pediatrics located at
Scott and White, Temple, Texas.